Rewrite contribute guide (#1797)
theforeman/theforeman.org: contribute.md

title: Contributing to Foreman
---

## Contributing Code

The Foreman is an open-source project that's licensed under the GNU General Public License version 3. Contributions of all types are gladly accepted! Before setting up your development environment, check out our [issue tracker](https://projects.theforeman.org/projects). We have a list of [trivial or easy](https://projects.theforeman.org/projects/foreman/issues?query_id=42) issues in the Foreman core project. Similar queries can be done in other projects on the issue tracker.

> Before writing any code, be sure to read the Foreman [handbook](/handbook.html) for some code guidelines and recommendations. You can find us on both our forum and IRC if you run into troubles when picking issues or setting up your development environment. See our [Support](/support) page for all the details on how to come chat with us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before writing any code, read the Foreman [handbook](/handbook.html) for some code guidelines and recommendations. You can find us on both our forum and IRC if you run into trouble when selecting issues or setting up your development environment. See our [Support](/support) page for all the details on how to come chat with us.
```

To get you started, we've prepared a short video demonstrating the process of both documented options.

TODO: Put the youtube lzaps video here.

#### Option A: Preconfigured virtual machine

You will need to download a copy of the current development code. [The
official code repository](https://github.com/theforeman) is located
on GitHub. All changes are made in the `develop` branch.

There is a tool called [Forklift](https://github.com/theforeman/forklift) that can be used to automate deploying Foreman development environments. This will work on Linux, MacOS or even Windows and the only required tools are Vagrant (virtual machine manager and image deployment tool), Ansible (configuration management tool) and a host with virtualization capabilities.

There are couple of installation profiles available, namely:

* centos7-katello-devel: Git clones of foreman, remote execution and katello plugins and all required backend systems running on CentOS 7.
* centos7-luna-devel: Git clones of foreman and all plugins which are shipped as Red Hat Satellite product running on CentOS 7.

> * centos7-foreman-nightly: Installation of nightly build of Foreman from RPM packages running on CentOS 7. This can be used for evaluation or pilot installation.

Reviewer 2: These are good examples, but I think we should mention that besides CentOS Linux 7 there are also other distributions and versions. Also, it was requested by the CentOS folks to start using CentOS Linux to differentiate with CentOS Stream.
```suggestion
* centos7-foreman-nightly: Installation of nightly build of Foreman from RPM packages running on CentOS Linux 7. This can be used for evaluation or pilot installation. You can substitute `centos7` with `centos8`, `centos8-stream`, `debian10` or `ubuntu1804` to get another base OS. Similarly, `nightly` can be replaced by `2.4` or any other supported version. Instead of `foreman`, `katello` can also be used.
```

That's probably too long though.

Follow instructions from the Forklift github repository README, in short it is as easy as:

```
git clone https://github.com/theforeman/forklift.git
cd forklift
vagrant up --provision centos7-katello-devel
vagrant ssh centos7-katello-devel
```

The last command connects as user `vagrant` with sudo permissions, then start foreman as usual:

```
vagrant# cd foreman/
vagrant# bundle install

> vagrant# npm install

Reviewer 2: These should be executed by the installer already so redundant.

vagrant# bundle exec foreman start
```

> Connect to the VM's IP address on port 5000 to sign in as admin with password changeme. See instructions below on how to change admin's password if you forget it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connect to the VM's IP address on port `5000` to sign in as admin with password `changeme`. See the following instructions on how to change admin's password if you forget it.
```

Reviewer 2: I think this is incorrect and you should really connect to `https://centos7-katello-devel.$HOSTNAME.example.com`. Port 5000 isn't supposed to be exposed and Apache's reverse proxy setup should be used.

Author: Yeah will fix, I was fuzzy about this. This was actually the first time I tried Forklift.

#### Option B: Setting up from git manually

> This option is more suitable when planning working on Foreman core, the main Ruby on Rails application, core user interface components or pages or pre-configured templates which are shipped with Foreman. It is also possible to clone and enable plugin repositories, however we do not recommend to manually install Katello plugin which require number of backend systems to be installed and configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This option is more suitable when planning to work on Foreman core, the main Ruby on Rails application, core user interface components or pages or pre-configured templates which are shipped with Foreman. It is also possible to clone and enable plugin repositories, however we do not recommend to manually install the Katello plugin which require number of backend systems to be installed and configured.
```

First of all, clone our upstream repository:

```

> git clone https://github.com/theforeman/foreman

Reviewer 2: Just a thought: does it make sense to already name it upstream instead of origin?
```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/theforeman/foreman -o upstream
```

Then you can later add your own fork using `git remote add` without having to clone it again.

Author: I actually keep upstream as "origin" and my fork as "lzap". This works more nicely with quick checkouts where you want to really check out something, build it, test it but you don't contribute. I will keep it as-is if you don't mind.

cd foreman
```

> If you plan filing pull requests on Github, then it's better to fork our repository, clone your fork and add the original as upstream repo:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you plan to file pull requests on Github, then it's better to fork our repository, clone your fork and add the original as an upstream repo:
```

```
git clone https://github.com/MYUSERNAME/foreman
cd foreman
git remote add upstream https://github.com/theforeman/foreman
```

> Some people prefer checking out the upstream repo as origin and add their forks under username:

Reviewer 2: I do both: upstream and my own username and no origin at all ;)

```
git clone https://github.com/theforeman/foreman
cd foreman
git remote add MYUSERNAME https://github.com/MYUSERNAME/foreman
```

The choice is yours.

#### Supported Ruby versions

> In general, any Ruby version supported by Rails version required by Foreman will work. However if you are just starting out, you may want to develop against one of the versions that we test against to reduce the chances of you hitting an unexpected issue, although this is not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, any Ruby version supported by Rails version required by Foreman will work. However, if you are just starting out, you might want to develop against one of the versions that we test against to reduce the chances of you hitting an unexpected issue, although this is not required.
```

> One way is to find Rails version by opening the [Gemfile](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/develop/Gemfile) and searching for `gem 'rails'` line, then finding out which Ruby versions are supported for that particular Ruby on Rails version. Another, perhaps faster way, is to visit our [Jenkins CI server](http://ci.theforeman.org/view/Foreman%20pipeline/job/test_develop) to see matrix of supported versions. Then pick any version from that list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Rails version is found by opening the [Gemfile](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/develop/Gemfile) and searching for `gem 'rails'` line. Then find out which Ruby versions are supported for that particular Ruby on Rails version. Another, perhaps faster way, is to visit our [Jenkins CI server](http://ci.theforeman.org/view/Foreman%20pipeline/job/test_develop) to see matrix of supported versions. Then pick any version from that list.
```

> Instructions for Fedora, CentOS 8, CentOS 8 Stream or Red Hat Enterprise Linux:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instructions for Fedora, CentOS 8, CentOS 8 Stream or Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8:
```

```
dnf module enable ruby:2.7
dnf install ruby ruby-devel
```

#### Supported Node.js versions

> In general, the latest stable Node.js should work. However if you are just starting out, you may want to develop against one of the versions that we test against to reduce the chances of you hitting an unexpected issue, although this is not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, the latest stable Node.js should work. However if you are just starting out, you might want to develop against one of the versions that we test against to reduce the chances of you hitting an unexpected issue, although this is not required.
```

You can view our [Github Actions configuration](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/develop/.github/workflows/js_tests.yml) to see supported NodeJS versions. Any version from that list will do. For populating the node_modules folder, npm version 4 or later is required. Alternatively, [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com) can also be used.

> Instructions for Fedora, CentOS 8, CentOS 8 Stream or Red Hat Enterprise Linux:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instructions for Fedora, CentOS 8, CentOS 8 Stream or Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8:
```

```
dnf module enable nodejs:14
dnf install nodejs
```

#### Supported PostgreSQL versions

In general, the latest version of PostgreSQL will work. Minimum version is currently 10, anything newer than that will do the job.

Instructions for Fedora, CentOS 8, CentOS 8 Stream or Red Hat Enterprise Linux:

```

> dnf module enable postgresql:10

Reviewer 2: Why would you enable version 10 specifically? I think it's safe to drop this line. On Fedora version 10 may even be dropped. I'd either recommend the default (10 on EL8) or actually choose version 12 since that's what we deploy on EL7 and recommend in our upgrade guide (but don't automate yet).

So either:
```suggestion
```

Or
```suggestion
dnf module enable postgresql:12
```

Author: Okay.

```

#### Libraries and database

Some Ruby libraries (rubygems) require development tools (compilers, make), libraries and header files and Chrome driver to be present on the host. Instructions for Fedora, CentOS 8, CentOS 8 Stream or Red Hat Enterprise Linux:

```
dnf groupinstall "Development Tools"
dnf install libvirt-devel postgresql-devel openssl-devel libxml2-devel sqlite-devel libxslt-devel zlib-devel readline-devel systemd-devel libcurl-devel krb5-devel
dnf install chromedriver
```

Foreman requires PostgreSQL, even for development. SQLite is no longer supported and will not work. Instructions for Fedora, CentOS 8, CentOS 8 Stream or Red Hat Enterprise Linux:

```
postgresql-setup --initdb
```

Configure security, for development purposes you can turn off authentication completely and let all users in on local sockets or loopback network interfaces. If you choose to use passwords, make sure to set them later:

```
grep trust /var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf
local   all             all                                     trust
host    all             all             127.0.0.1/32            trust
host    all             all             ::1/128                 trust

> ```

Reviewer 2: Or, you use ident auth which is on by default and doesn't require you to change the DB setup. See my suggestions below:

Author: Wait, are you saying that it should work without ever touching `pg_hba.conf`?

I am not sure which suggestion below you are referring to.

Author: I doublechecked and my clean Fedora installation does not run any ident service on port 113/tcp. I think it is safer to use `trust`.

Reviewer 2: That's a different ident. What I'm saying is that these are the instructions to get it to work:
```console
$ sudo dnf install postgresql-server -y
$ sudo postgresql-setup --initdb
$ sudo systemctl enable --now postgresql
$ sudo createuser --superuser $USER
$ git clone https://github.com/theforeman/foreman
$ cd foreman
$ cp config/settings.yaml.example config/settings.yaml
$ cp config/database.yml.example config/database.yml
$ bundle install
$ bundle exec rake db:create
$ bundle exec rake db:migrate
$ bundle exec rake db:seed
```

Be sure that https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/commits/2d6f26c2c180e0af9180170f5dcc3ef335c99481 is in what you checkout.

Start the service and create databases:

```
systemctl enable --now postgresql

> su postgres -s /bin/bash
> foreman# createuser -s foreman
> foreman# createdb --owner=foreman foreman
> foreman# createdb --owner=foreman foreman-test
> foreman# exit

Reviewer 2: Or you create a superuser with the same username and use that. Then you can just create the DB without changing user:
```suggestion
sudo -u postgres createuser --superuser $USERNAME
createdb foreman
createdb foreman-test
```

Author: Arent you missing sudo commands for each command? I will add them.

Reviewer 2: No, I have sudo for `createuser`. Since it's a superuser, you don't need sudo for `createdb`.

```

#### Configure Foreman

In the Foreman git repository, create and review necessary configuration files. If you named the databases "foreman" and "foreman-test" then no change is actually needed, but we do recommend to review configuration files because a change will be necessary depending on what you are planning to work on:

```
cp config/settings.yaml.example config/settings.yaml
cp config/database.yml.example config/database.yml
```

Install the required Ruby gems. If you encounter a compilation error during rubygems installation, you are probably missing either development tools or library or headers. See above.

```

> bundle install --path=vendor/

Reviewer 2: With Bundler 2 this gives a deprecation warning. If you want to use that path (and I'm not 100% sure you do):
```suggestion
bundle config set --local path vendor/
bundle install
```

```

It is possible to skip some rubygems when you don't plan using specific features, although this is not recommended. You can probably use this if you cannot figure out what library are you missing:

```

> bundle install --without="journald ec2 ovirt vmware openstack libvirt gce" --path=vendor/

Reviewer 2: Again, this is deprecated. Instead, use this prior to install:
```suggestion
bundle config set --local without "journald ec2 ovirt vmware openstack libvirt gce"
```

```

Install the required Javascript modules:

```

> npm install

Reviewer 2: This uses the Ruby environment so `bundle exec` should be used.
```suggestion
bundle exec npm install
```

Author: No in this tutorial I suggest to use OS-level npm from Fedora module. This is actually correct.

```

You can delete at any point `vendor/ruby` or `npm_modules` directories if you run into some issues and reinstall all libraries from scratch.

> To run integration tests, it's best to install chromedriver package from your distribution as it comes with compatible chromium headless browser. See above how to do this for Fedora and Red Hat compatible distributions. If you don't do this, npm will install chromedriver that might be not compatible with your Chrome or Chromium browser which can lead to error "Chrome version must be between XX and YY."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run integration tests, it's best to install the **chromedriver** package from your distribution as it comes with compatible chromium headless browser. See the previous section for instructions on how to do this for Fedora and Red Hat compatible distributions. If you don't do this, npm will install chromedriver that might be not compatible with your Chrome or Chromium browser which can lead to error "Chrome version must be between XX and YY."
```

> When using system chromedriver, set the correct path to it via variable. For Fedora that would be: `TESTDRIVER_PATH=/usr/bin/chromedriver`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the system chromedriver, set the correct path to it via a variable. For Fedora that would be: `TESTDRIVER_PATH=/usr/bin/chromedriver`.
```

#### Create and seed database

> Create database tables and seed initial data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create database tables and seed the initial data:
```

```
bundle exec rake db:migrate
bundle exec rake db:seed
```

> Seed process will print random admin password you need to remember or copy. In case you want to set your own admin password:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The seed process will print a random admin password that you need to remember or copy. If you want to set your own admin password:
```

Reviewer 2: Or, you can use the environment variable `SEED_ADMIN_PASSWORD` to explicitly set it when you run `db:seed`. There's a few more. https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/develop/db/seeds.d/035-admin.rb can be used but I think https://github.com/theforeman/puppet-foreman/blob/f69c9f1b90a67798aef4c89e432ee8c29bf05a9b/manifests/database.pp#L16-L24 is easier to read.

Author: Thanks going to update this.

```
bundle exec rake permissions:reset password=changeme
```

#### Start up Foreman

> Start Ruby on Rails (Puma server) and Webpack NodeJS process:

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this is easier to understand?
```suggestion
Start the Ruby on Rails and Webpack application servers:
```

```
bundle exec foreman start
```

Navigate to [http://localhost:5000](http://localhost:5000) and login as `admin` with the password from the db:seed step earlier.

#### Running tests

To run the whole test suite:

```
bundle exec bin/rake test
```

To run a single test:

```
bundle exec bin/rake test TEST=test/functional/your_test.rb
```

Once done, stop any background processes with `bundle exec spring stop` ([more info](/handbook.html#UsingtheSpringpreloaderindevelopment))

#### Adding plugins

> Foreman plugins are Ruby on Rails Engines and most of them have similar installation procedure. Make sure to read plugin documentation and README in the git repository for more details, but generally the procedure as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Foreman plugins are Ruby on Rails Engines and most of them have similar installation procedures. Make sure to read plugin documentation and README in the git repository for more details, but generally the procedure as follows:
```

```
cd foreman
cat >bundler.d/webhooks.local.rb <<EOF

> gem "foreman_webhooks", :path => "../foreman_webhooks/"

Reviewer 2: I like the shorter notation:
```suggestion
gem "foreman_webhooks", path: "../foreman_webhooks/"
```

EOF

> cd ..
> git clone https://github.com/theforeman/foreman_webhooks
> cd forean

Reviewer 2: How about a single command:
```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/theforeman/foreman_webhooks ../foreman_webhooks
```

bundle exec rake db:migrate
bundle exec rake db:seed
```

#### Foreman proxy (smart-proxy)

Installation and configuration of smart-proxy is pretty straight-forward:

```
git clone https://github.com/theforeman/smart-proxy
cd smart-proxy
cp config/settings.yml.example config/settings.yml
bundle install
```

> By default, smart-proxy does not listen on any port and SSL is not configured, so it is needed to uncomment `http_port` configuration value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, smart-proxy does not listen on any port and SSL is not configured, so uncomment the `http_port` configuration value:
```

```
grep http_port config/settings.yaml
:http_port: 8000
```

> Also, to elevate authorization for Foreman, remote IP address and/or DNS hostname must be in the `trusted_hosts` list. This will depend on how your system connects to the proxy (IPv4 or IPv6) and also on how the remote IP address is reverse-resolved. The following list of trusted entries should do the trick:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To elevate authorization for Foreman, either the remote IP address or DNS hostname, or both, must be in the `trusted_hosts` list. This depends on how your system connects to the proxy (IPv4 or IPv6) and also on how the remote IP address is reverse-resolved. The following list of trusted entries should do the trick:
```

```
grep -A10 trusted_hosts config/settings.yaml
:trusted_hosts:
- localhost
- localhost4
- localhost6
- 127.0.0.1
- ::1
- your_host_name
- your_host_name.with.full.domain.com
```

To start the smart proxy:

```
bundle exec bin/smart-proxy
```

Add the smart-proxy in the foreman user interface as `http://localhost:8000`.

> To configure SSL, generate a CA cert, a server cert and a client cert with a common name listed in trusted hosts configuration. Assuming the following files:

Reviewer 2: Perhaps SSL should be its own subsection?

* `ca.crt` - CA cert
* `server.{crt,pem,key}` - server SSL cert
* `client-localhost.{crt,pem,key}` - client SSL cert

Then configure Foreman (via Administer - Settings) as follows:

* SSL CA cert: `ca.pem`
* SSL cert: `client-localhost.pem`
* SSL key: `client-localhost.key`

And configure smart-proxy as:

```
grep ^:ssl config/settings.yml
:ssl_ca_file: "ca.pem"
:ssl_certificate: "server.pem"
:ssl_private_key: "server.key"

grep ^:https_port config/settings.yml
:https_port: 8443
```

Then you can add smart proxy in Foreman UI as `https://localhost:8443`.

#### Enabling proxy features and plugins

> Smart proxy starts with pretty much no features enabled, they need to be individually configured. Most of the features (which are essentially build-in plugins) and external plugins (these live in separate git repositories) require some backend system configuration so this is out of scope for this guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart proxy starts with almost no features enabled. Each feature must be individually configured. Most of the features (which are essentially build-in plugins) and external plugins (these live in separate git repositories) require some backend system configuration so this is out of scope for this guide.
```

Here is how you can enable a simple feature which requires no configuration or a backend system:

```
cd smart-proxy
cp config/settings.d/logs.yml.example config/settings.d/logs.yml
grep :enabled config/settings.d/logs.yml
:enabled: true
```

And here is how you can enable a simple (external) plugin without a backend system:

```
cd smart-proxy
grep shellhooks bundler.d/shellhooks.local.rb

> gem "smart_proxy_shellhooks", :path => "../smart_proxy_shellhooks/"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gem "smart_proxy_shellhooks", path: "../smart_proxy_shellhooks/"
```

> cd ..
> git clone https://github.com/theforeman/smart_proxy_shellhooks
> cp smart_proxy_shellhooks/settings.d/shellhooks.yml.example \
>   smart-proxy/config/settings.d/shellhooks.yml
> cd smart-proxy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/theforeman/smart_proxy_shellhooks ../smart_proxy_shellhooks
cp ../smart_proxy_shellhooks/settings.d/shellhooks.yml.example \
  config/settings.d/shellhooks.yml
```

Before writing any code, read the Foreman [handbook](/handbook.html) for some code guidelines and recommendations. You can find us on both our forum and IRC if you run into trouble when selecting issues or setting up your development environment. See our [Support](/support) page for all the details on how to come chat with us.

### Setting up a development environment

These types of tasks generally require a familiarity with Linux, Ruby, Ruby on Rails, Javascript and React development. If you are still new to Rails, community members can help you if you get stuck with something or have any other questions.

To get you started, we've prepared a short video demonstrating the process of both documented options.

> TODO: Put the youtube lzaps video here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/A2eCNVvrciU" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
```
